# HWACA: HotWire Automatic Cutter for Aerofoils

## Project Description
HWACA is a 4-axis CNC Hotwire cutter designed for cutting aerofoils from styrofoam. This is achieved by controlling the position of two ends of a wire with two axes per end. The ends can move independently of one another to achieve wings with different root and tip aerofoils. The wire is heated by applying a voltage across it (voltage varies with length and properties, used 3.75 Volts for a 40mm long high-E guitar string as wire).

Motor control is handled by an Arduino Mega 2560 running the HWACA_InterfaceController.ino sketch. NEMA 17 stepper motors are driven by A4988 motor drivers and are powered by a 12V lab bench power supply. This sketch communicates with the HWACA-Interpreter.py script to allow the user to send commands to the machine. This script can also read a G-Code file generated by HWACA-Slicer.py to be executed by the machine.

The hardware is designed to be largely 3D-printable or incorporate standard parts. The platform is easily exandable to allow for larger work volumes. 3D files of the hardware can be found in the 3D-Files folder as a fusion 360 assembly with work volume of 400 x 100 x 100 mm (length x width x height).

## Installation & Setup
To begin, upload the HWACA_InterfaceController.ino sketch to the Arduino and wire according to the pin definitions:
```
// Pin definitions
const int motorPin[8] = { 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29 };  // Pins in pairs (Step, Direction) for each motor (X, Y, I, J)
const int xLimitPin = 18;
const int yLimitPin = 19;
const int iLimitPin = 20;
const int jLimitPin = 21;
```
or edit the sketch to fit your wiring. Since there is no user interface, it would also be helpful to have a python-capable IDE you're comfortable with to edit code to match your system. Visual Studio Code was used in testing. Finally, connect the arduino to your computer via USB.

## Operation
A G-Code file can be generated from a data file using HWACA-Slicer.py. To do this, a data file in the form of a .txt file with space-separated coordinate columns is required. These can be found at [airfoiltools.com](http://airfoiltools.com), just be sure to download in Selig format as this is ideal for hotwire cutting. In HWACA-Slicer.py, a the filenames (without file extension) of two aerfoils can be named as root and tip and a filepath specified to the files as shown. Additionally, an output filepath is specified.
```
filename = ['N-10', 'N-10']
filepath = [f'/Users/ben/Desktop/Projects/HWACA-Project/Input/{filename[0]}.txt', f'/Users/ben/Desktop/Projects/HWACA-Project/Input/{filename[1]}.txt']
outputFilepath = f'/Users/ben/Desktop/Projects/HWACA-Project/Output/Toolpath_{rootFilename}_{tipFilename}.gcode'
```
Running the HWACA-Interpreter.py script will begin serial communication with the Arduino and request a user input in the terminal window. Here, the user can specify commands for the machine to execute. The interpreter sends the user's input as a string to the arduino where it is processed, hence, any command starting with the character 'G' will be executed as a G-Code command given the arduino supports it (only `G1` "run" and `G28` "home" supported currently). By inputting`>run` into the user interface, the interpreter will send, line by line, the G-Code from the slicer output (filepath specified) to the arduino, requesting further input when the operation is done.

## MIT License
Copyright (c) 2023 Benjamin Jakobs

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.